piper: add page (#13144)
tldr-pages/tldr: pages/common/piper.md

# piper

> A fast, local neural text to speech system.
> Try out and download speech models from <https://rhasspy.github.io/piper-samples>.
> More information: <https://github.com/rhasspy/piper>.

> - Output a WAV [f]ile using a text-to-speech [m]odel (assuming config json at path to model_path + .json):

Reviewer: Hi, IG it would be better to rephrase this `(assuming config json at path to model_path + .json)`

```suggestion
- Output a WAV [f]ile using a text-to-speech [m]odel with `config.json` at the model path:
```

Author: The original is definitely clunky, but this suggestion would be incorrect. If you have a model at `long/path/foo.onnx`, then it will by default look at `long/path/foo.onnx.json`, not `config.json`. Otherwise you need to specify the JSON file using `-c`.

The main reason of mentioning this at all, is that while the files are named correctly on huggingface (i.e. each `foo.onnx` is accompanied by a `foo.onnx.json`), it seems if you follow the standard way of downloading the files by the links given the JSON name gets mangled into being something like `foo_foo.onnx_foo.json` which breaks this automatic detection, unless you manually CURL'd the URLs yourself.

Author: would it perhaps be ok if I simply reword `assuming config json` in the original to `assuming a config file`?

Reviewer: > would it perhaps be ok if I simply reword `assuming config json` in the original to `assuming a config file`?

Yeah, that would work too.

`echo {{Thing to say}} | piper -m {{path/to/model.onnx}} -f {{outputfile.wav}}`

> - Output a WAV [f]ile using a [m]odel and specifying its [c]onfig json:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Output a WAV [f]ile using a [m]odel and specifying its JSON [c]onfig file:
```

`echo {{Thing to say}} | piper -m {{path/to/model.onnx}} -c {{path/to/model.onnx.json}} -f {{outputfile.wav}}`

- Select a particular speaker in a voice with multiple speakers:

`echo {{'Warum?'}} | piper -m {{de_DE-thorsten_emotional-medium.onnx}} --speaker {{1}} -f {{angry.wav}}`

- Stream the output to the MPV media player:

`echo {{'Thing to say'}} | piper -m {{en_GB-northern_english_male-medium.onnx}} --output-raw -f - | mpv -`

- Speak twice as fast, with huge gaps between sentences:

> `echo {{'Speaking twice the speed. With added drama!'}} | piper -m {{foo.onnx}} --length_scale {{0.5}} --sentence_silence {{2}} -f {{drama.wav}}`

Author: But then you don't have two sentences, which demonstrates the `--sentence-silence` parameter

> # piper-tts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# piper
```

Author: Changed to package name as suggested in latest amended commit

> > A fast, local neural text to speech system that sounds great.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> A fast, local neural text to speech system.
```

This is the self-description of the program.

> More information: <https://github.com/rhasspy/piper>.

> - Output a wav [f]ile using a [m]odel (assuming config json at path to model_path + .json):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Output a WAV [f]ile using a text-to-speech [m]odel (assuming config json at path to model_path + .json):
```

`echo {{Thing to say}} | piper -m {{path/to/model.onnx}} -f {{outputfile.wav}}`

> - Output a wav [f]ile using a [m]odel and specifying its [c]onfig json:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Output a WAV [f]ile using a [m]odel and specifying its [c]onfig json:
```

`echo {{Thing to say}} | piper -m {{path/to/model.onnx}} -c {{path/to/model.onnx.json}} -f {{outputfile.wav}}`

> - Select a particular speaker in a voice with multiple speakers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Select a particular speaker in a voice with the specified number of speakers:
```

Author: This is incorrect, so I think I need to reword it since it's clear my original wording was confusing. Voices have 1+ "speakers", and the specified number chooses the speaker, not the number of speakers.

So for example the thorsten_emotional voice has the following speaker options:
```
amused (0)
angry (1)
disgusted (2)
drunk (3)
neutral (4)
sleepy (5)
surprised (6)
whisper (7)
```
and the number selects which speaker you're choosing. Specifying the number of speakers doesn't really make sense in context.

Do you have any suggestions how I could make this clearer, succinctly?

`echo {{'Warum?'}} | piper -m {{de_DE-thorsten_emotional-medium.onnx}} --speaker {{1}} -f {{angry.wav}}`

> - Stream output immediately to mpv (synthesizing second sentence while first sentence is spoken):
> 
> `echo {{'First sentence. Second sentence'}} | piper -m {{en_GB-northern_english_male-medium.onnx}} --output-raw -f - | mpv -`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Stream the output to the MPV media player:

`echo {{'First sentence. Second sentence'}} | piper -m {{en_GB-northern_english_male-medium.onnx}} --output-raw -f - | mpv -`
```

Author: If I make this change to remove the explanation about the synthesizing, I guess I should also change the example text? For now I've gone with the one from the example two above it, which is "Thing to say"

Alternatively I could copy what the official docs does to convey the information in the example itself, which is 
```
echo 'This sentence is spoken first. This sentence is synthesized while the first sentence is spoken.' 
```
but when I did that I felt the example got too long and unwieldy.

Author: @spageektti made a different suggestion later on, and I went with that instead

- Speak twice as fast, with huge gaps between sentences:

`echo {{'Speaking twice the speed. With added drama!'}} | piper -m {{foo.onnx}} --length_scale {{0.5}} --sentence_silence {{2}} -f {{drama.wav}}`

- Download model and config after trying it out on <https://rhasspy.github.io/piper-samples/>:

> `export MODEL="{{en_GB-alba-medium}}"; for EXT in .onnx .onnx.json; do curl -L "https://huggingface.co/rhasspy/piper-voices/resolve/main/{{en/en_GB/alba/medium/}}$MODEL$EXT" > $MODEL$EXT; done`

Reviewer 3: Not sure if I'd keep this example ... After all, this demonstrates how to download files, and not the usage of piper

Author: I was torn on this but included it because:
1. there's only one place where you will download models, and it would be super useful to see that in one of the examples
2. I noticed that `ollama` includes an example for `curl`ing an update, which seemed to me a similar level of relatedness (arguably less so)
3. piper-tts is literally useless without at least one model, and I don't know how to document it succinctly such that someone would know how to rectify this without giving up on the `tldr` page and looking at the github repo

Of course, I can remove it, but it'd be nice to address no. 3 somehow in its place

Reviewer: > Is it perhaps ok to include a link to https://rhasspy.github.io/piper-samples/ somewhere in the description of the project? As far as I can see though that doesn't seem to be done anywhere else, with the only link being to the project page itself.

Yep, you can include an additional line of page description, if it's really necessary. We have a few pages like [pacman](https://github.com/tldr-pages/tldr/blob/main/pages/linux/pacman.md?plain=1) doing the same.

Author: Great, well I've done that now, and removed the `curl` example. Does that work for everyone?
